Hebrew borrowings in to Russian language The reader is already acquainted with a list of lexical borrowings from Hebrew to Russian language through my previous publication “Hebrew, Russian and the Khazars S tory ”. I present here a few additions to the list, which have accumulated over the years. П обеда-pobeda - Victory The word is c omposed of п о + беда - po + beda - trouble . Po , as we have seen, in Hebrew mean s here . As to trouble - beda – there is no known origin to this word in Hebrew . Further, it appears that that the phonetically and semantically based may, in fact, be reverse, for how has victory become trouble ? A possible explanation is found in Vasmer 's Etymological Dictionary , stating that victory in Old Russian meant defeat. Hence, trouble may be an appropriate explanation after all, considering the evolution of this word over time. We may assume that , beginning from antiquity , the Russian-speaking population may have has different perceptions for similar events; where some viewed events as victory , others recognized them as defeat , or trouble . Consequently, w inners were using the same term as those defeated to describe events, while attributing a different meaning to this term. It may also be, that winners were only recently acquainted with the Slavic language and unfamiliar with the various possible meanings of each word. Hence, the transformation of the meaning of the word from trouble to victory, noted by Vasmer , is clarified . Abracadabra - абракадабра Th is broadly-used word describes something devoid of meaning. Etymolog ically and based on historical written evidence, it is linked with a certain spell pronounced emperor Caracullus ' physician (3rd century AD) , in the Aramaic language . I believe it is in fact a borrowing from Hebrew. ̶ הברא כדברה - avre kadabera ̶ recover according to her word ( means word of Holy Scripture ̶ Torah ) – what could be more suitable for the purpose of healing ? Б урить-burity - Drill In Hebrew, בור - bor means pit . T his may be connected to the origin of the verb бурить - burity to dril l consequently leading to the creation of a pit. The Etymological Dictionary points to the German bohr and Turki sh bur , both also meaning to drill , but does not state their origin. Х вороба - к hvoroba - Disease Hebrew חבורה - havura - bruise originates in Ac c adian. Vasmer mentions links to Sanskrit and other Indo-European proto-languages . Perhaps this is evidence of ancient contacts between the Semitic and Indo-European languages , hence the Hebrew nominative bruise is origin to one of the Russian words meaning disease . In fact, b ruise was possibly a leading cause for disease in Russia due to the common villagers’ custom of boxing matches amongst young men. Артания , Арец и Рус - Artania , Arets and Rus Artania is t he name of the mysterious country from which Russian merchants arrived in Khazaria . Al Istakhri , a Muslim historian and geographer dating to the 10 th century, names a Russian tribe - whose merchants are found in Khazaria - Arsania . Ars is the name of their city. Unlike other Russian centers like Kiyoba or Tmutarakan , Ars and Arsania ha ve not been identified definitively to this day. Al Istarhi writes that no foreigner returned from there (more specifically, that foreigners we re killed there), although Arsania n merchants exist and bring sables, foxes and tin. In Hebrew ארץ - aretz means - country. Hence Ars may be just a country . And ארצנו - Arceinu , Arsania or Artania means Our Country. It is possible that merchants fluent in used it instead of other n ames , perhaps in order to hide the particular geographical information from Russian Khazars . Or that the Khazar ian in terlocutors knew Hebrew as well and understand them. . О каянный - okayanhiy - Cursed, restless This was certainly taken from the Bibl ical story of Abel and Kain. It is unknown whether this word was awaiting the baptism of Vladimir Monomakh or was previously rooted in the Russian language. I personally believe i t entered the language directly through Russian children learning Bible stories in Jewish, Christian and Muslim schools in Khazaria , 200 years before Monomakh. Вельзевул - velzevul - Beelzebub Wikipedia mentions its origin in the Hebrew Bibl ical term בעל זבוב - baal zvuv , which is the was name of the deity at the city of Ekron . If this is indeed the case, I find the sound of Beelze v u v - velzevuv preferable. On the other hand, the Hebrew בעל סבל - baal sevel means the Owner of misery or T he D evil , a dditionally lending the sound of Вельзевул-velzevul to Russian with the same meaning as the original Hebrew. Could this be the origin to one of the Devil’s Russians names? Х алтура - khaltura - Quickie Finally we arrive here: A well-known historian drew my attention to this word, pointing out to those who associate the word culture with the phonetical koltora – , כל תורה , i.e. t he whole T estament (in Hebrew) . Assuming the similarity between koltora and khaltora , khaltura may link culture with a hack . Let us delve in deeper; Most etymologies of the Russian word халтура find its origin in church life. O ne such source describes men occupied by khaltura as monastic librarians during the 11 th -14 th centuries. The Etymological Dictionary defines халтура - khaltura as an entry in the burial book. In both cases, we are referring to an orderly clerical action. In Hebrew חל תור - hal tor means the turn has come . So much for the khaltura , as the definition of both church office and part-time work at the same time. Its other meaning, related to the careless quality of products , attracted the attention of a previously unnamed historia n and evidently evolved, in the beginning of the 20 th century into the opposite meaning to associated with accu rate office work. Т овар и товарищ - tovar and tovarish - Product and comrade Vasmer in his Etymological Dictionary links these words to the Turki sh tovar . I suggest the Hebrew דבר – davar as a possible source, meaning a thing . A commodity, as a rule, is a thing, and so may have entered the Russian language through Jew ish merchants , rather than through nomadic Turks. As to the suffix – ish : איש - ish in Hebrew means a person , i.e. a man of goods ( things ) – tovar ’ s ish , or more precisely: one who is comrade to the deal , an ally , or a man of common business (a s a comrade should be ). Г алдеть , гвалт - galdety , gvalt - Shout, hullabaloo Vasmer mentions links between these two words in his D ictionary. He rejects the h ypothesis that stated their origin in Hebrew , seeking German sources. I propose viewing the Hebrew הבל - hevel as the primary source . In Hebrew, the expression הב ל פיו - hevel piv means an illegible, meaningless statement . The sound, denoted in Hebrew by the letter ה - English h is sometimes transformed into Russian - г( g ) , a s in the word הר - har – mountain gora ( гора ) in Russian (also seen in the German hertz and Russian gertz ( герц ) ). Х озяин , хозяйство - khozyain,khozyaystvo - Host,owner , farm In roots of these words one may recognize the Hebrew חוזה - hoze - contract . Russian poetess Inna Ros was the first to recognize and publish a hypothesis regarding this connection. Л ясы точить - lyas h i tochity - To sharpen the tongue In Hebrew, a similar expression - חידודי לשון - hidudey lashon - has been known for at least a thousand years. Hidud literally means shar pening - точить - tochity in Russian , and lashon means tongue . Here, therefore, S h turns into s and lashon into lyas ’ h i ( tongue ) Лясы . Such borrowing of a popular idiom testifies to the environment in which it took place , apparently an intellectually advanced society . К атавасия - к atavasiya - Disorder This word originated , according to the Etymological Dictionary , in Greek, i ndicating the performance of religious hymns by the integration of various choirs . Without suggesting another etymology, we note that, breaking it down into syllables, we get k a tav asiya , which in Hebrew means - כ תו עשיה ketav asiya - execution like a note . Whether Hebrew influenced Greek in this case has yet to be determined . In wither case, the Jewish Bible contains the expression נעשה ונשמע , that is, first do and then listen . Perhaps , then, earl y Christian s took this literally as execution. К олымага - к olhimaga - Rattletrap This is a wreck wagon or cart . Most likely, the combination of Hebrew - כול kol - everything and - עימה - imaha - with her created this term, referring to a wagon carrying inside anything and everything. This may have entered Russian through H ebrew speaking merchants . Т a ким макаром - takim makarom - That way This is a Russian idiom. Ta ким means that in Russian , while мак а ром or мак а р has merely one additional example in Russian , as a first name for a man. This idea was previously analyzed i n the previous paper “Hebrew Russian and Khazar ’ s story” , as the Hebrew word מכר - makar – known . Hence, the Russian idiom “ Таким макаром - takim mak a rom ” is composed of the Russian Т ak -t ак and Hebrew מכר - мак а р , using Russian grammar rules for words couplin g, liternally meaning ” that known way ” . К умир - kumir - Idol The word к умир - kumir word is based on the Hebrew root כמר - kamar - to fumigate . The modern כומר - comer – a priest in Hebrew originates from it . Vasmer does not object to the Hebrew origin, but is challenged as to how it entered the Russian language. The response to this challenge therefore be t hrough the Khazars and their concurrent use of Hebrew and Russian . С кверна - skverna - Filth I t is difficult to understand why Vasmer chose to overlook the Semitic origin of this word , being one o f the clearer examples of borrowing between languages . Both in Russian and in Hebrew , by this word we refer to one’s attitude towards the remains of the dead, maintained according to ancient traditions. קבר – kever is nominative in Hebrew for grave , and according to Jewish tradition a fter visiting the cemetery, one is required to wash hands in order to clean the filth . Moreover, men of the priestly clan ( Kagans in Russian or Kohanim in Hebrew) are even prohibited to enter a cemetery. From the Hebrew קבר - k eve r , therefore, came the Russian c кверна - skverna - filth , by adding the prefix “ c” -with. К рохи - krohi - Crumbs According to Vasmer , крохи mean crumbs, grains . If so, th is word may originate from the Hebrew term for a loaf of bread - כרח לחם - kerah lehem . The Hebrew kerah may serve as origin for the Russ ian kroha – k роха , mean ing something very smal l . Indeed this refers to something small of any kind , not only bread, but may have originally been used in reference to bread crumbs. Ш ельма - shelyma - Smart guy King Solomon is biblically and historically noted for his wisdom s. In Hebrew his name is Shlomo - Шл o м o . With ti me , the original Shlomo may have transformed to the Russian s helyma . Habalka - хабалка I originally encountered this word in the writings of the modern Russian author Bykov , uncertain of its meaning at the time. An possible explanation was later offered to me, stating that хабалка meant a woman with a dangerous character. In Hebrew we have the word חבלה - habala – diversion , and it would be prude not to wonder whether these were connected in some way. Б отать по Фене ( from argo - thieves' slang ) - botaty po fene - To speak This means to speak in thieves' slang - argo , where the first word in th e expressio n is straightforward: Botat y comes from בוטא - bote or מבטא mewate - expressing or speaking in Hebrew. As to f en e : V asmer believes th at it originated in Ofen ya , a car t in the slang of itinerant traders travelling through Russian villages in the past . Ofenya obviously comes from the Hebrew אופן - o p han - wheel . З абацать ( argo slang )- zabatsaty - Make money The root of this Russian slang word is баца - batsa . In Hebrew בצע - betsa mea n s lucre both in Biblical times and t o day . It is unclear how this Hebrew word transformed into Russian. There is a Yiddish word batsab - בעצב , that originated in Hebrew and could be a possible origin to the Russian , however the second b that is found in the Yiddish term, is lacking in the Argo root. For this reason, the dire ct borrowing from Hebrew to Argo is preferable , in my opinion, to using the Yiddish as an intermediate. How this transformed is discussed in our previous book. Кащей - kashyey - Kashyey This obscure Russian name belongs to a very negative fabled person from a fairy tale , and becomes apparent through Hebrew. קשה - kashe - means heavy, oppressive and so on, corresponding with the legendary Кащей - kashyey . К велить - kv elit y - Bringing to tears K велить - kvelity means bringing to tears in Russian slang . קבילות - kv ilot , in Hebrew means complaints . Ш ататься - shatatysya - To wander the streets לשוטט – leshotet , in Hebrew is literally to wander the streets . There is no connection with the value of instability which is the second meaning for шататься . К ресло - kreslo - Armchair כרס - keres - be lly already appeared in our work in connection with a beautiful maiden. Keres lo - כרס לו means he has a belly , possibly leading to the Hebrew term for כורסא , an armchair . Vasmer discusses this word at length, yet gives no clue as to its origin . Н а халяву - na khalyavu - For free The word khaliva - חליבה exists since medieval Hebrew and means milking . This Russian expression , with Hebrew its root , seems to have entered modern Hebrew, giving the corresponding meaning to the ancient verb to milk - לחלוב - lakhlov . F iguratively , this means to use someone's financial capabilities to one’s own advantage. Ш ут , шутить - shut, shutity - Jester, joke V asmer mentions linguists who link the origin of the Russian шут - shut - jester with the Hebrew שוטה - shote – moro n , while consequently disagreeing with this link in light of the antiquity of the Russian word. For those who are familiar with the Khazar -Slavic connection, causing the inclusion of Hebrew even long before the 7 th century, the antiquity of the word is not a challenge to this link . О хмурить - okhmurity - To fool O хмурить ¬̶ is to deceive, to cheat, to make a fool , even view another as a kind of Ass . Ass in Hebrew חמור ̶ hamor . Turning another into a supposed ass could be " ohamorit y " , transforming into okhmurity - O хмурить . Х апать и хапануть – khapaty , kh apanut y - Seize and grab According to V a s mer , a word came from Old German. We , however, suggest that the origin lies in the Hebrew ver b חפן ̶ k hafan . Means to pinch or grasp , dating to the early middle ages in the Mishnah. From here, k hapanut y probably came about, gradually becoming grab . In modern Hebrew, the word חופן - khophen - a handful is still in use since then. Even Shoshan , author a famous Hebrew dictionary , connects it with the Ak k adian uppanu - to grab with the palm . It is interesting to note that k hafan - חפן is a combination of two Hebrew words: k haf - kaf – כף - palm and fan -pan - פן - side or face . Hence, it may literally mean hold your face in your palms . The word khaf - kaf – palm and its action create d the Russian verb хапать - khapaty . С волочь и шваль - svoloch , shvaly - Bastard and Tras h There are etymological publications linking bastard with garbage dumped in a pit, as an intermediate to the word trash . T he meaning of these words is , however, different and may be viewed in a figurative sense of the etimology . How did this come about ? We offer a possible link between the Hebrew word סבל – sevel - suffering and scum . One c ausing sevel (suffering) is a bastard . The Russian syllable och is added to the sevel which, pronounced together quickly, may have transformed into svoloch – сволочь - bastard in Russian . As for trash , according to V asmer , this is an ancient tailor , or the name of a Novgorod merchant from the 17 th century , Ivashka Shvali . In both versions ( which, by the way, can be reduced to one ) , it is interesting to note a possible connection with Hebrew through the word שובל - shoval , which in Russian means a train in ladies' dresses . Л узгать - luzgaty - To nibble The Russian verb is c omposed of two Hebrew words : Luz - לוּז - walnut tree , and Gat - גת - in which was the ancient site for extracting oil by crushing olives. Instead of olives , in ancient Russia nuts and seeds were the commodity, but the essence remains. Сорока и сурок – soroka and surok - Magpie and marmot The question of how such different animals own similar names in Russian , may be that both animals whistle. To whistle in Hebrew is שרוק - shrok . Sh may have become S , and the names of the animals arrived through Hebrew . T his case may be e specially intriguing since it connects the Slavic names with places inhabited by Slavic people , also home the Magpie and marmot . South Russia and the Ukrai ne may be such place , where the Khazars were located as well . Явь , явление , явиться - yavy , yavlenie , yavitsya - Reality, phenomenon, appear Linked and possibly derived from the Hebrew te r m יבוא - y av o ! - come in! . Shmenka from Y. Aleshkovsky - ш менка ( argo - thieves' slang) - shmenka "Get your shib ka and shmenka ." The meaning of the shmenka is unclea r, pe rhaps referring to some amount of money to start with, שמן - shemen - in Hebrew oil and grease . Maybe the shmenka was intended to lubricate difficulties with certain p ersonnel - leshamen in modern Hebrew . К урить - kurity - To smoke In Aramaic, כורא - kura - means to make a fire . In Hebrew, starting with the prophet Ezekiel , כור - kur is a hearth . Fires in a hearth gave origins to Russian verb for smoking - курить - kurity . Е т е р - ye t e r - All other A ccording to V asmer ет е р - yet e r means some, someone . In Hebrew יתר - y et e r means - everything else or all ot h ers . The connection is clear : everything else is something else or someone or some . Ц инк о вый ( argo - thieves' slang ) – tsink o viy - Sentry in prison According to Grachev (see list of publications in “ Russian Hebrew and The Khazar story” ) , цинк о вый - ts i nkoviy means a s entry in prison . In Hebrew צינוק - tsin o k – prison cell . А смоед ( argo - thieves' slang ) – a smo ed - Prison food - lender In Russian prison food was a type of currency. A p rison food - lender was in the position of a moneylender in the out -of- prison world . Argo named this person асмоед - а smoe d . There are no Russian etymologies published by Vasmer concerning this name. In Hebrew אסם - as am is a food warehouse. The s uffi x ед came from еда -food in Russian , while асмоед - а smoed is a person that eats from אסם - as a m - a food warehouse . В ира - v ira ( argo ) - Murder – Вира - vira is a m urder ( Grachev ). In Hebrew עבירה - avir a – is an offense . Hence, e ven in thieves' slang , a murder i s an offen s e . Ч ерта - cherta - Stria, notch- Vasmer mentions proto Slavic - certti and ancient Indian - kartti . If th is is correct, th is may be joint word with ancient Hebrew based on the ro ot סרט - srt - to notch and a nd the word סריטה - srita that means exactly- черта - cherta . Based on the same con sonants in all these words. Т ворить - tvority - С reate The R ussian творить - tvority and Hebrew ברא - b a ra corre late . F or tvority the only etymologies presented by Vasmer are Slavic words. For bara , etymological correlations exist ( according to the Even Shoshan Dictionary ) in Aramaic and Arabic , as well as in the Bible . Tvor and bra both have similar root components - vr in Russian , br in Hebrew . The b could have change to v , the ma in difference is the t in the first consonant of the Russian word. To this, we may suggest the following: in Aramaic language there is the prefix ד -d , which adds the meaning of belong ing to the following word. Dvara - דברא – , therefore means created in Aramaic (and was earlier presented in the passage concerning Abrakadabra ). Further, it contains a similar phonetic form as the Russian T v a ry-tvorenie - творение , i.e. DVR and TVR. One cannot help wonder , therefore, about the possible connection between ancient P rotoslavs and Aramaic speakers . П одавно , П оздний и П одлец - podavno,pozdniy , podlets - Even more so, late and scoundrel Let us open with the ending: Scoundrel- подлец , may be similarly suggested as in the main text of " Hebrew, Russian and Khazars Story " . a scoundrel - подлец could be the result of adding po+ делец - hustler . Po - פ ה - here + businessman . Vasm er offers no enlightening interpretation here, rather links it with either near or long . However, a companion to joint business does not always act as a scoundrel in Russian , but could also be a friend - tovarish - товарищ . Late - поздний - pozdniy This word contains three components: po + z + d niy . Po - פה – here , comes from Hebrew פה . Z a - за – after . The Russian pr e ffix за is removed in this word . D niy - дний - days is a Russian word дни with the suffix й for the adjective formation. It therefore creates здесь за днями - here after days - late - поздний . . In Vasmer's etymological explanation for поздний , the connection with the ancestors of today's past and passe is interesting , yet it cannot be ruled out that the word has several distinct roots which eventually created the final version. Even more so- подавно - podavno is a result of pairing the Hebrew Po - פה – here with the Russian давно - davno -long ago. Here long ago therefore means here in the meaning of at this time , or here in the meaning of long ago , or perhaps always , leading to the meaning – as always, which is - подавно - pod a vno in Russian. . Religious terminology and more . In the following, we will discuss s everal Russian words derived from T he Testaments and L etters of Paul. Е сьм - yesym - To exist- From letter to the Corinthians : ” На благодатию Божию есьм то, что есьм .” "By the grace of God, we are what we are ." In the Hebrew version we find the word ישים - yasim , m eaning to take place in reality, to be realized . A number of Indo-European and Semitic languages ​​have words similar in sound and meaning (is, ist , yesh ) . We can therefore assume that there was some common Proto - origin for this word , or a borrowing between Pr o -Indo-European and Pr o - S emitic in their earlier stage s . Simultaneously , as far as the Slavic есьм - yesym is considered , it is difficult to deny its appearance in connection with the Hebrew ישים - yasim , holding a very similar same sound and meaning. Т щетно - tshyetno - In vain - In Hebrew there is the verb התיש - hetish - to exhaust , to nullify all efforts . T he Russian in vain therefore appears to have phonetic roots in the sound tsh - тщетно - tshyetno , perhaps owing to the bilingual nature of the Slavic speakers in Khazaria . О реол - oreol - Aureole Vasmer omits this word from his Dictionary . Other e tymological d ictionaries connect it to the Latin word for gold . In Hebrew אור יעל - or yaal mean s rising light or shining . Could it be aureole ? In Russian, at least, this is the precise meaning of o реол - oreol , such that, for instance, ancient Icons of Rublev ( 1410 AD) depicted saints with ring s of light shining o ver their heads. Perhaps this is how Rublev named this phenomen on. Или , Или ! Лама савахтани ?!-Ili, Ili ! Lama savakhtani ? - My God, my God, why have you forsaken me? (The Gospel of Matthew). The se are last words of Jesus , i n Hebrew: אלי , אלי ! למה סבכתני ! - Eli, Eli! Lama s avakhtani ? - My God, my God! Wh y have you got me into! We do not know why the Russian version of the Bible prefers Ili, Ili to Eli, Eli as in the original . Perhaps this variation hints to an intermediate step between Hebrew and Russian. Others etymologies prefer Aramaic as the origin to this phrase , where savakhtani is translated to forsaken rather than got into as in Hebrew. The phrase has different meanings in these different languages. Aramaic was widely spoken back then , although Jesus was likely fluent in Hebrew a s well . Let us highlight a few interesting points . First, this phrase apparently holds such importance that future copies in different languages cite it in its natural language with subsequent explanations. Second, Jesus addresses God while essentially creating a distinction between Him and himself. That is, the trinit y does not appear to final, if it does exist at all as this point . Finally, "Wh y have you got me into ? !" in the Hebrew translation refers to the great suffering in the last moments o f Jesus’ human existence. Лоно Авраамово - lono avraamovo - Abraham’s side Th e Russian lono comes from Luke 16:22 “The time came when the beggar died and the angels carried him to Abraham’s side. ” In Russian , however , lono does not mean side . The human organ mentioned by Vasmer and others is h a rdly suitable here. Rather, the wo rd is likely associated with the Hebrew ver b לן - lan - sle ep and mean ing a place of sleep . Гора Елион - gora elion - Mount Elion Mount Elion is mentioned in Acts. In Hebrew , הר עליון is Har Elion - Гора Елион - gora elion - Mount Elion . This is a fine example for the transformation of the sound " h " into the Russian " g ". Акельдама - Akeldama - Akeldama The place called Akeldama is interpreted as the land of blood . In Hebrew, היכל דם - h eik h al dam - palace of blood . С идеть Одесную - sidety odesnuyu - To sit on the righ t hand of God In Orthodoxy, this phrase means to sit with God on the throne of government . Odessnaya most likely comes from the Hebrew הדס - adas , the tree, or branches that may have fanned J esus in the entrance to Jerusalem . הדס - adas in Russian is мирт - myrtle . Myrtle was one of the symbols and indispensable attributes of Christian holidays. The frescoes of the Ipatiev Monastery depict the scene where Christ presents the myrtle bouquet to the Mother of God. In Greek and Roman tradition, myrtle wreaths were worn on the heads of young wives and heroes. И скушать - iskushaty - To tempt It is not connected, in our opinion, with eating only ( кушать - kushaty -to eat ) , but may be also linked to the Hebrew היקשה - h iksh a - made it difficult - искушать - iskushaty . At least for religious texts. С моковница - smokovnitsa - Fig tree Similar to Czech smokva and a number of other Slavic words, this is like ly associated with a fi g tree , as mentioned by Vasmer , thought he does not offer an explanation for this link . Figs turn red under the influence of the sun. הסמיק - hism i k - means blushed . Consequently, the Hebrew root סמק – смк - smk was the likely origin to fig tree - смоковница - smok o vnitsa in Russian as well in other languages. Hence смаковать - smakov a ty -to relish , or in the noun form- смак - smak -gusto. Анания - ananiya - Haninah Анания - ananiya is Biblical name , derived from חנניה – Hananiah , which Hebrew also mean s merciful . Е ресь - yeresy - Heresy In our opinion, th is word is associated with the Hebrew ארס - e res - poison , rather than being a derivative from the Greek choice , as in Vasmer ’s Dictionary . У зы , узник , узкий - uzhi , uznik , uzkiy - Ties, prisoner, narrow Vasmer link s prisoner with bonds , while the word narrow has no link to the previous two in his Dictionary , rather connecting the latter with a Russian origin. We , however, believe that they all may be linked to the word узкий - uzkiy - narrow . In Hebrew we find the verb עזוק - azok - to tie the limbs , as well as עזוק - az u k - fettered, limited in freedom of movement . From this узкий uzkiy - narrow was therefore derived . Shackles in modern Hebrew is azikim - עזיקים - узы - u zhi . Saul- Савл - Savl "A young man named Saul tormented the church." Saul is Hebrew is שאול - Shaul , the name of the first king of Israe l, as well as the Hebrew name of Paul . In Russian Christianity , however, he is called Савл - Savl , possible due to t o first Russian Christians w commandment of Hebrew , who deliberately chose to alter the name from Saul to Savl , meaning Hebrew סבל - s e vel – torment , hinting to the one who tormented Christians . From Saul-Paul we find Pavel - Павел in Russian. Глагол Божий - glagol bojiy - The say of God Vasmer has no non-Slavic etymologies for gologolit y - глаголить - speak , glas - гл ас - spoken and golos - голос -voice associated with th is v erb. If turning to Hebrew, we may associate the Russian idiom Глагол Божий i.e. The say of God with the Hebrew phrase Gala Kol beYahweh - גלה קול ביהווה - Gala Kol beYahwe . יהווה - yahwe - Jehovah - Иегова is one of God’s names . Gala Kol means proclaimed . Beyahwe means by God . Combined, we have one proclaimed in the name of God ( Yahwe ) . The sounds " k " and " g " can vary. And Gala Kol may alternately be read as glagol - глагол . The Bible in its Russian version knew Yahwe - Jehovah as Иегова . B eJehovah can be pronounced as beezhova , from here bojevo , or in the n ominative- bojiy - Божий . F r om here , perhaps comes Боже , which is God in Russian. С арга - s arga - Strips of bark According to V asmer сарга - sarga is a gray cloth or strips of bark for weaving fine shoes. In Hebrew , סרג - sarag - weave. T he origin of this word is therefore quite clearly H ebrew. Край ( одежды )- kray - Edge of (clothing) This word likely originates in the Hebrew קריעה - kriah - break or קרוע - karua - torn . This may be true also for the Russian кроить - kro i ty - to cut of the cloth . The eye and the letter O. Concerning the possible link between the word and the letter – There are two Russian words for Eye , one of them being Oko . In his Dictionary, Vasmer places the ancient Indian aksi a s the sourse of Ok o , in addition to mentioning Slavic connections for the letter O . In the first Proto-Hebrew and Phoenician alphabets, the sign O is named a in - עין . Ain is translated into Russian as an eye - глаз - glaz or Oko . The origin of the O letter sign is found in the Egyptian hieroglyph depicting an eye with a pupil point within . Over time, the point was omitted from alphabet , and the letter became rounded, while retaining its Hebrew name ain - עין – Eye - Oko . Cyril and Methodius, the creators of Russian writing, were apparenely familiar with ancient alphabets and used them in the creation of the Cyrillic alphabet. They may have used the Russian name of the eye - Oko , using the shape of eye for the letter O , vocalized as - O , a s well as the Hebrew word ain - eye has been used for the name of the letter ע . In addition to the letter O , the uppercase small letter b is suspiciously similar to the Proto-Semitic counterparts of ancient alphabetic records , rather than to Greek and Latin alphabetic counterparts . . П одавно - podavno - Even more so According to the compilation approach, по - po - פה - here , but can als o be used for at th at moment ( po bemakom ) . Also - davno - давно - means a long time ago. At t hat moment a long time ago therefore appears to be the primary origin to the Russian word п одавно - podavno - . From it , the wider meaning of even more so later came . Vasmer , however, holds that this is a native Russian word. П од -pod - Under The prefix под -pod is one of central s in Russian , used to compile a set of words, e.g. crush, adjust, crawl, subject , etc. We suggest that is may be connected with the Hebrew פה - po - here . Following are several words formed with под - pod as a product of compilation. По + down + лезть - под лезть -crawl up По + down + лить - под лить - add liquid По + down + лежащее - под лежащее - subject Etc . As to how English entered this compilation - down is taken from English for show , and did not actually enter Russian. However, we may suppose that down ha s a nearer origin or relative where the Proto-Slavs and English people ancestors lived. And, indeed, in Latin exists the word de , which similar to the English down , means down . On another note, the Aramaic prefix ד - d may be the origin of the d in the compound word po + d = pod = under . In Aramaic , ד - d means belonging , similar to Russian - on the basis , according to . We may also choose to remain with the Anglo-Latin variant and assume the existence of a common origin similar to the Latin de , in which case t hen the combination of Hebrew or West Semitic po - פה - here with Latin de - below turns into a Russian под -pod- under or sub . To conclude, so far we have been able to list several Russian prefixes and prepositions origina ting in ancient links with Hebrew and other West Semitic languages: при , по , вы , под . В -v - In- Another important preposition (prefix) is " в -v ". For example, в комнате - in a room or в нутри - in side . In Hebrew and a number of West Semitic languages ​​ – this prefix is ב - b, v . Occasionally, it has a hard sou nd - b , while occasionally sounding soft er - v , as in Russian. In Indo-European linguistics, there are two main explanations: it is believed that the Proto-Slavs added " v " to the Indo-European " n " and received the Old Russian " vn ", or th at " vn " was already present in the Indo-European proto-language. Eventually , the British as well as oth er s Europeans developed " in " in addition to other combinations of " n ", while the Slavs remained with " v " voicing . Clear evidence of such a development is hard to find , but supposing this is tru e, why did Slavs choose " v "? Perhaps it was due to the Semitic world around them, in which ב - b or v w as the prefix в – v- inside , etc. W h ere did the name of S lavs - Славяне - slav y ane - c o me from? Я не - y ane is understandable: a suffix like они - oni that means they . T he reader will easily find explanations of the origin for Slav in various etymologies and variety of opinions. Neither, however, reach final conclusions. Let us therefore suggest another option, based on the Hebrew-Semitic borrowings in Slavic Russian speech presented in this work and earlier in the book "Hebrew, Russian and the Khazar story " . Some of the prefixes are difficult to explain based on the relatively short and late influence of J udaism on the population of Khazaria , as previously discussed. The Jewish tradition in Middle Age writings defined the Slavic spe e ch as a Canaanite language and named the area of the Slav ’ s settlement Canaan . The incentive behind this is unclear, and raises questions concerning the motive, or perhaps even ignorance of the Jewish scribes in doing so. Today, we know that one of the Egyptian names for the population and territory of the Levant was kn"n , ( around late 2 nd and early 1 st millennium BC ) . We also have a significant amount of historical records and archeology concerning this period and area, in which lived Canaanites, the peoples of the sea, Phoenicians, Jews, Israelites, Arameans as well as captive of Egyptians, Hittites, Assyrians, Babylonians , Persians and G r eeks during different periods of the 2 nd and 1 st millennia BC. During most of this time , writing already exist ed : first - cuneiform and hieroglyphs, then - alphabetical. Current researchers read and decryp t these writing . It turns out , that not only Sumerians and Akkad ian s lived in Mesopotamia and its environs , rather that f or most of the 2 nd millennium BC, an additional population known as Amo rites existed alongside them. The Amorites lived a mainly nomadic lifestyle, as shepherds, but also took part in the urban population. They even occasionally seized power over Akkadian cities and founded dynasties such as Hammurabi in Babylon ( who was not the actual founder, but clearly the most famous representative of t his dynasty). Amorite language differed Akkadian. A dditionally we had Semitic o f the West Semitic group, which also di ff ered from the A k k adian - East Semitic according to linguists . The places of residence of Amorites were in between South ern part of Mesopotamia and the North ern -West of Mesopotamia, and there are scholars who interpret the name of the Amorites as similar to the name of a d istrict i n the west of Mesopotamia. This is today's Levant , AKA Canaan, as indicated in the Egyptian papyri. On another note , the Old Testament mentions a victory of Joshua over the king of the Amorites , there described as tall and strong men . T here can therefore be little doubt that they lived in Canaan , and perhaps even spoke the Canaanite language, an ancestor of modern Hebrew. We also know that the Amorites were not a small local tribe, but a large and diverse population spread over the entire Fertile Crescent from the South to the Nor t h - west. There they were in close contact with both the Hittites and the peoples of the sea and Hurrians, some of whom were of Indo-European languages roots. The striking fact is , that their name is associated with the Hebrew word אמור - emor - say . The semantic connection between Russian слово -word and אמור – emor -say is similar to the connection between the names of the population groups Славяне - Slavs and Amorites אמורים . Is this accidental? Did the Amorites switch to the Slavic language and replace their name with the corresponding Slavic word? Or reversely, did the Slavic tribe name itself in Sl avic people of words, following the example of the Amorites? A s imilar phenomena of nam ing in foreign language is found in other languages ​​and sometimes called calque . An example of another Slavic calque is mentioned below, all the more interesting since it was born and apparently distributed among the Slavic scholars or writers during the per iod of Russian writing culture origins . Ч итать и считать - chitaty , s’chitaty - Read and count The meanings of these words are clear. It is also clear that i n Russia n, both are based on читать – to read . V asmer and other specialists in Russian etymology do not recognize see any foreign connections other than to the Slavic worl d . One could assume, given the flourishing of reading and possibly counting that the word читать - chitaty - to read was created by Cyril and Methodius, two Greek monks who gave Russia the alphabet s , or at least adapted it from Gree k . This h owever cannot be the case, otherwise we sh ould have read the corresponding version in all Slavic etymologies. If we c arry out our previous idea concerning contacts of Slavs with West Semitic languages, we will find in Hebrew a root that concerns two sim i lar objects as in Russian language - books ( subject s of reading) and c ount . This root ספר - sfr serves an origin for words: -סופר sof e r - writer , ספר - s e fer - book and a verb סופר - sof e r - to count . Its etymology points to Akkadian- saparu - to write . It can be concluded from archeolog ical evidence concerning the development of writing , where the first meaning for sfr based words was - to mark and count and books has been developed later. Among Slavs, the process was obviously going in o ppositive direction by adding the prefix c - s - with to the word читать - chitaty - read . Thus, we may conclude that Russian holds a calqued example from other language , produc ing считать - s’chitaty from an already existing part of the pair читать - chitaty -read . Therefore, an existence of reading in Slavs society and a Slavic word for a meaning to read - читать – chitaty before Cyril’s alphabet seems to be proven . Slavs could possibl y read Greek, Latin, Iranian, Arabic. However, knowing they were part of the Kazar’s world in which rulers accepted Jewish religion, we may deduce that they were using Hebrew as well . That is why the calque Read and count- читать и считать - chitaty , s’chitaty could be copied from Hebrew book and count- sefer and sofer . This is also why it may be possible to find such footprints of direct translations from Hebrew texts to Russian . I think most professionals may will reject the above explanation. I beg to differ . First, this provides a comprehensive explanation to the early appearance of Hebrew borrowings in the Slavic languages , as well as to the medieval Jewish definition of the Slavs as Canaanites. Seco nd , so far, a relatively small amount cuneiforms texts have been read and, perhaps, years of future research will shed new light on the topic . F inally , t he Slavs had a written language even before Cyril and Methodius. Memories of the " черты и резы - lines and cuts " of th e s e writing s are part of Russian history. Several dozens of these records were published by I. L. Kuzlasov in his book "Runic Writings of the Eurasian Steppes" (Moscow. "Eastern Literature", 1994) Geographically, some of these writ ing were found in areas of the Khazar world (North Caucasus, Don, South and Middle Volga) and Southwestern Siberia. With regard to the Khazar writing, I. L. Kyzlasov is of the opinion that this is was an alphabetic writing of a previously unknown Proto-Sinai alphabet. That may be one of the earliest alphabets, examples of which variations were found in Sinai. Kyzlasov does not consider a question of how this alphabet got to the regions of southern Russia, the Don and the Volga in the 8-10th centuries AD, while the time and place of its creation and distribution should be implied in the 13-11th centuries BC in the Sinai or Levant region. Only the migration of languages ​​and peoples c ould sufficiently explain the appearance of this alphabet on the Don and Volga , two thousand years after its creation in the Middle East. The decoding of these inscriptions has not yet been made at a sufficiently substantiated level.